[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> I think there's a perception
that only strong women have
home births, which I find
extraordinary because I think
all women are strong.
You totally understand that it
doesn't matter whether you're
a woman giving birth out
in a field or a woman
giving birth in a
multi-scrillion dollar mansion
home birth, you're just
a woman giving birth.
And it's the most humbling
and yet humanizing
thing that you could
ever experience.
I've had two home births,
one in 1988 and one in 1994,
Charlie and William.
First one was when I was 35, and
the second one when I was 40.
The reason I chose
the home births
was because I had
heard so many horror
stories about people's
intervention in their births
in hospitals.
I wanted to be in control
of things as best I could.
Not understanding then
that you're not in control
in the sense that
you're just a vessel
and it's going to
happen, whatever,
but I didn't want to hand
over my births, my children's
births.
And I also didn't want to have
everybody go home at the end
and leave me there.
I wanted the creation
of the family
to start right there and Then
With both births, I didn't
do much visiting of doctors.
I went to a doctor for
confirmation of the pregnancy
and expressed my desire to
have a home birth and sort
out my midwife Maggie
Lecky Thompson,
and I saw her monthly and then
weekly in the last few weeks.
And I felt so loved and
embraced and empowered by her.
She filled me with confidence.
She was absolutely a
realist, but she just
made me feel completely capable.
So there was
absolutely nothing that
made me feel I couldn't
trust this woman with me,
my life, and my baby's life.
Everyone's birth has the
capacity to go horribly wrong,
but it also has the capacity
to go absolutely wonderfully.
Charlie was due on
the 13th of January.
On the 1st of January, a friend
of mine, she's kind of psychic,
I guess, she's very
attuned to things,
she said, this baby's
ready to be born.
And I went, oh yes, right,
13 days, it's all good.
And she said, no, no, the
baby's ready to be born.
And she started
giving me a massage
on the tummy in that
circular motion,
and she said, but you
have to be able to say,
I'm ready for this
baby to be born.
And I couldn't say it.
I couldn't say it.
I just cried and sobbed,
and I did everything.
I couldn't do it.
Anyway, eventually I did, and
I went into labor that night.
I just remember the fact that
there were these moments where
it didn't hurt.
It came on, and it happened,
and then it went away,
and you could have a laugh and
a joke and a bit of whatever.
And came back and went away.
And I had this thought
through my head,
I will never have to have
that contraction again.
So it was always this
moving forward thing.
And I'd read so
extensively about birth.
Nothing about parenting
unfortunately,
but I'd read every
book there was to read,
and it was nothing like any of
the books told me to expect.
I didn't feel like a little
ship bobbing on an ocean.
I didn't feel anything that
I thought I would feel.
I didn't get to the
music I wanted to play,
I didn't have any of
the oils, nothing.
It was just full-on into it.
And then by the time
I was at second stage,
my husband was
sitting on a chair,
and I was kneeling on the floor
with my head in his crotch
holding the back of the chair.
He was like that,
and I was like that.
And Charlie kept going,
hello, and going back, hello,
and going back.
And every time his
head appeared, I'd
hear all these cameras going.
And then it was
like a grand final.
They'd go, oh, aww, oh, aww.
And I said, can we
have no more photos
just for a little while please?
[GRUMBLES]
And then the midwife
said, would you
be more comfortable in
another position, darling?
And I said, I don't know,
I've never done this before.
If you think there's
another position I'd
be more comfortable in,
I wish you'd tell me.
I think that was sort of a
transition moment probably.
And so she got me up, and
Charlie was almost coming out.
And I staggered over to the
bed, and I lay back on the bed.
And there's a
fantastic photo of me.
There was a mirror there,
and I couldn't see.
I didn't want to video tape it.
I wanted something in my life
not to be recorded like that.
I regret it now.
And there's a shot of me
with his head like that,
and I'm saying, turn
the mirror towards me.
And it looks like
I'm saying, his head
feels like it's this
big, because there's
this little head.
I remember Maggie
the midwife saying,
when the baby comes out,
nobody tell her what it is.
Let her find out for
herself what it is.
The minute his head was out,
it was January in the Blue
Mountains, summer, this
amazing mist descended all
around the house, and
about 150,000 butterflies,
white butterflies,
came to the windows,
and there was an
almighty clap of thunder.
And there were eight witnesses.
It wasn't just me going nuts.
So loud that she was
saying, don't push,
don't push, don't
push, don't push,
because she was checking the
cord, and I couldn't hear her.
Anyway, he came out,
and I just looked.
I couldn't do anything.
I just looked at him.
And she said, aren't you
going to pick him up?
Oh!
I said, is it a boy?
And she said, yes,
it's a boy dammit.
Sorry I told you.
Anyway, I picked him up, put
him straight on the breast.
The atmosphere in the
house was just beautiful.
It just felt blessed is the
only way I can describe it.
There just seemed to be
a glow around the house.
It was just beautiful.
And the greatest thing is we
all slept together that night.
Charlie was exhausted, the baby
was exhausted, I was exhausted,
my husband was exhausted.
Charlie slept for
nine hours that night,
and that was the longest
he slept for two years.
But it was just so fantastic.
And the midwife came
every day for a week,
and I had so much support,
people bringing food.
It was like a community
gathering, community event,
and it was just beautiful.
With the second baby, because I
was 40, I had an amniocentesis.
Other than that, I didn't
go to a doctor at all
because I knew at 40, they
would be concerned about my age.
But I had textbook
pregnancies both times,
and I just felt
completely OK with it all.
And I remember the second
time thinking, oh, this
is a piece of cake.
Yes, it's painful, I'm
having a bath, la, la, la.
And oh gosh yes, then
terrible, terrible.
Must be getting
close by now, Maggie.
And she said, you're
4 centimeters.
And I went, oh no.
Oh no.
I had forgotten.
And she tried to encourage
me to go for a walk,
and I tried and I couldn't.
And then she said, what
about the birthing stool?
And I tried and I couldn't.
And my waters broke
way into the labor
and broke and broke
and broke and broke.
And Charlie got fed
up and went to school,
and he told them that I'd
had the baby, and I hadn't.
And they said,
what did she have?
And he said, they're
working it out now.
And he came home
and realized I still
hadn't had it and started
to see William crowning
and thought he looked like
a slug, a little hairy slug.
He'd had so much Rescue
Remedy, he was probably drunk,
I suspect, Charlie.
But he was at the end of my
body when the baby was born.
And again, that atmosphere was
there, that absolutely blessed
holy atmosphere
around the house,
and Charlie was
suitably wide-eyed.
That wore off in about three
or four days with Charlie.
But it was just so special,
so special, and the greatest,
greatest experience of
my life, both of them.
And you never forget it ever.
Mm-mm.